Update documentation (#121)
KwanLab/Autometa: docs/source/running-autometa.rst

#. Trim adapter sequences from the reads. We prefer to use Trimmomatic_, but you can go ahead and any tool of your preference.
#. Quality check of reads to make sure that the adapters have been removed, we use FastQC_ for this.
#. Assemble the trimmed reads. We recommend using MetaSPAdes which is a part of the SPAdes_ package to assemble the trimmed reads but you can use any other assembler as well.
#. An optional thing to do here would be to check the quality of your assembly as well. This would give you N50 which could be useful in selecting the value of length-filter. We tend to use metaQuast_ for this (use ``--min-contig 1`` option to get an accurate N50).

.. note::

    If you use end up using SPAdes then Autometa can use the coverage information in the contig names. If you have used any other assembler, then you first have to make a coverage table.

    Fortunately, Autometa can construct this table for you with: ``python -m autometa.commmon.coverage``. Use ``--help`` to get the complete usage.

Nextflow walkthrough
====================

Why nextflow
------------

.. todo::
    Mention some advantages of using nextflow

> Set autometa parameteres
> ------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set autometa parameters
-----------------------
```

> Before we start running the pipeline we first need to alter some of the default paprameters in ``parameters.config``. A pre-made template is available on our `Autometa GitHub repository <https://github.com/KwanLab/Autometa>`_ which you can edit and customize as per your needs. You can access the ``parameters.config`` file template from `here <https://github.com/WiscEvan/Autometa/blob/4b4e3c60e076706e28deae4ae4d45f26b5df7dee/nextflow/parameters.config>`_. Go ahead and copy the file to the location of your choice and open it in your favorite text editor (vim, nano, vscode, etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we start running the pipeline we first need to alter some of the default parameters in ``parameters.config``. A pre-made template is available on our `Autometa GitHub repository <https://github.com/KwanLab/Autometa>`_ which you can edit and customize as per your needs. You can access the ``parameters.config`` file template from `here <https://github.com/WiscEvan/Autometa/blob/4b4e3c60e076706e28deae4ae4d45f26b5df7dee/nextflow/parameters.config>`_. Go ahead and copy the file to the location of your choice and open it in your favorite text editor (vim, nano, vscode, etc).
```

.. code-block:: bash

    // Find this section of code in parameters.config
    params.metagenome = "<path/to/assembly.fna>" 
    params.interim = "<path/to/interim_results/>" 
    params.processed = "<path/to/processed_results/>"

You can also input multiple asseblies at once with the help of wildcards. In the below example all the files with extension "fasta" would be taken as input by nextflow_.

.. code-block:: bash

    // Find this section of code in parameters.config
    params.metagenome = "<path/to/assembly_dir/*.fasta>" 
    params.interim = "<path/to/interim_results/>" 
    params.processed = "<path/to/processed_results/>"

.. note::
    Wildcard characters will only be interpreted when "double quotes" are used

Database directory
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Autometa uses the following NCBI databses throughout its pipeline:

- Non-redundant `nr database <ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/FASTA/nr.gz>`_
- `prot.accession2taxid.gz <ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz>`_
- *nodes.dmp*, *names.dmp* and *merged.dmp* from `taxdump tarball <ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz>`_ 

> If you are running autometa for the first time you'll have to download these databases. Use ``autometa-update-databases --update-ncbi``. This will download the databases to the default path. You can check the default paths using ``autometa-config --print``. If you need to change the default download directory you can use ``autometa-config --section databases --option ncbi --value <path/to/new/ncbi_database_directory>``. See ``autometa-update-databases -h`` and ``autometa-config-h`` for full list of options.

Reviewer: This is kind of making me think we should just have a default path be the current directory if the user has not yet configured their databases section.

I.e. Without configuration

```bash
autometa-update-databases --update-ncbi
```

creates databases and specified sub-directories

1. mkdir -p ./databases/ncbi
2. downloads and formats ncbi files to `./databases/ncbi`

Maybe we need to rethink? Also would `autometa-databases` be a better entrypoint name?

In your ``parameters.config`` file you also need to specify the directory where the different databases are present. Make sure that the directory path contains the following databases:

- Diamond formatted nr file => nr.dmnd
- Extracted files from tarball taxdump.tar.gz
- prot.accession2taxid.gz

.. code-block:: bash

    // Find this section of code in parameters.config
    // Update this path to folder with all NCBI databases
    params.ncbi_database = "/Autometa/autometa/databases/ncbi"

Runtime parameteres
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can configure the number of CPUs that each job should use.

.. code-block:: bash

    // Find this section of code in parameters.config
    // Change the number of CPUs you want each job to use
    params.cpus = 2

> Additional autometa parameteres
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional autometa parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> You can also adjust other pipeline parameteres that ultimate control how the binning would be done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also adjust other pipeline parameters that ultimately control how the binning is performed.
```

> *params.length_cutoff* : Smallest contiog you want binned (default is 3000bp)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*params.length_cutoff* : Smallest contig you want binned (default is 3000bp)
```

*params.kmer_size* : kmer size to use

> *params.kmer_norm_method* : Which normaization method to use. Choices are centered log-ratio transformation (clr), Autometa's clr implementation (am_clr) and isometric log-ratio transformation (default is am_clr)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*params.norm_method* : Which normalization method to use. See :ref: kmer advanced usage section for details
```

> Choices are centered log-ratio transformation (clr), Autometa's clr implementation (am_clr) and isometric log-ratio transformation (default is am_clr)

This should be described in the kmer advanced usage section then we can just link to that here

> *params.kmer_pca_dimensions* : Number of dimensions to reduce the initial 512 dimension big k-mer matrix to (default is 50)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*params.pca_dimensions* : Number of dimensions of which to reduce the initial k-mer frequencies matrix (default is 50)
```

> *params.kmer_embed_method* :  kmer-embedding method. Choices are "sksne", "bhsne", "umap" (default is bhsne)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*params.embedding_method* :  Choices are "sksne", "bhsne", "umap" (default is bhsne) See :ref: kmer advanced section for details
```

> *params.kmer_embed_dimensions* : Final dimensions you want to reduce the pca reduced kmer matrix to (default is 2).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*params.embedding_dimensions* : Final dimensions of the kmer frequencies matrix (default is 2). See :ref: kmer advanced usage section for details
```

> *params.kingdom* : Bins contigs belonging to which kingdom. Choices are "bacteria" and "archaea" (default is bacteria)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*params.kingdom* : Bin contigs belonging to this kingdom. Choices are "bacteria" and "archaea" (default is bacteria)
```

We could by default go through marker annotation and binning for all kingdoms. This way, this parameter would be removed.

*params.clustering_method* : Cluster contigs using which clustering method. Choices are "dbscan" and "hdbscan" (default is "dbscan")

> *params.binning_starting_rank* : Which taxonomic rank to start the binning from. Choices are "superkingdom", "phylum", "class", "order", "family", "genus", "species" (default is "superkingdom")

Reviewer: These should also contain references to the binning advanced usage section

> *params.classification_method* : Which clustering method to use for unclustered recruitment step. Choices are "decision_tree" and "random_forest" (default is "decision_tree")

Reviewer: This should reference the unclustered-recruitment advanced usage section

*params.completeness* :  Minimum completeness needed to keep a cluster (default is atleast 20% complete)

*params.purity* : Minimum purity needed to keep a cluster (default is atleast 95% pure)

*params.cov_stddev_limit* : Which clusters to keep depending on the covergae std.dev (default is 25%)

> *params.gc_stddev_limit* : Which clusters to keep depending on the GC% std.dev (default is 5%)

Reviewer: These should all reference the binning advanced usage section

Running the pipeline
--------------------

You can run autometa using nextflow_ in multiple ways. You can install nexflow using conda by doing ``conda install -c conda-forge nextflow`` or you can also install from source using the instructions mentioned in their `documentation <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/getstarted.html#installation>`_

.. note::
    1. Run the following commands directly in ``bash``. Nexflow will automatically submit jobs to SLURM or any other sheduling system.
    2. You can use `tmux <https://github.com/tmux/tmux/wiki>`_ or `screen <https://www.gnu.org/software/screen/>`_ in case you want to exit the window or disconnect from the server.
    3. The pipeline must be launched from a node where the ``condor_submit`` command is available, that is, in a common usage scenario, the cluster head node.

>     4. The HTCondor executor for Nextflow_ does not support at this time the HTCondor ability to transfer input/output data to the corresponding job computing node. Therefore the data needs to be made accessible to the computing nodes using a shared file system directory from where the Nextflow_ workflow has to be executed (or specified via the -w option).

Reviewer: These are only relevant to users that want to run with an HTCondor executor. This should be moved to its own section. I think this would be intimidating to a new user trying out nextflow

With docker (Simplest)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Make sure that you have Docker_ and nextflow_ installed. You can run autometa pipeline using ``nextflow run KwanLab/Autometa -c parameters.config``

> In case you want to tweak some of the scripts and modify the pipeline you can clone the repository and then run autometa using ``main.nf``. This is completely optional and would be useful only for development purposes.

Reviewer: > useful only for development purposes

What if the user wants to run on their own scheduling system? i.e. run with slurm? This does not seem developmental but requires some tweaking with either parameters.config or the nextflow.config in the repo

.. code-block:: bash

>     # Clone the autometa repository
>     git clone git@github.com:KwanLab/Autometa.git
>     # Navigate to the clone repository
>     cd $HOME
>     # Run nextflow
>     nextflow run main.nf

Reviewer: This does not make sense. Where did this `main.nf` file come from?

```suggestion
    # Clone the autometa repository
    git clone git@github.com:KwanLab/Autometa.git $HOME/Autometa
    # Run nextflow
    nextflow run $HOME/Autometa/main.nf
```

Without docker
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> By default autometa's implementation using nextflow_ makes use of Docker_. You can diasble it in either your ``nextflow.config`` file or the ``parameters.config`` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default autometa's implementation using nextflow_ makes use of Docker_. You can disable it in either your ``nextflow.config`` file or the ``parameters.config`` file.
```

> Editing ``nextflow.config``:

Reviewer: Where is this nextflow.config file coming from? So far there has been no mention of where to find this

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: groovy
```

    // Find this section of code in nextflow.config
    docker {
    enabled = false // <-- change to this
    // Nextflow will run using the local autometa installation
    // rather than the docker image specified.
    fixOwnership = true
    }

> Editing ``parameteres.config``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Editing ``parameters.config``:
```

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: groovy
```

>     // Find this section of code in parameteres.config
>     docker.enabled = false // override use of docker to use local Autometa installation

Reviewer: This section does not exist in parameters.config.

```suggestion
    // Add this section of code in parameters.config
    docker.enabled = false // override use of docker to use local Autometa installation
```

> Now install autometa using one of the three install methods specified in :ref:`Install` (Directly using conda or from source). After the install you can run autometa using ``nextflow run KwanLab/Autometa -c parameters.config``. Nextflow_ would use the entrypoints created during the install to run autometa. Make sure to actiavte your conda environment before running incase you have installed using conda.

Reviewer: This is not at all clear. There are three different methods suggested for installing autometa, but you are telling the user to run autometa basically using the GitHub repo. Why would they specify the repo for nextflow if they have just went through the trouble of a local install?

Other useful options
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> ``-c`` : In case you have configured nextflow_ with your executor (see below) and have made other modifications on how to run nextflow_ using your ``nexflow.config`` file, you can specify that file using the ``-c`` flag

Reviewer: This flag is required since you must provide your parameters config file with `-c paramters.config`. Doesn't seem necessarily like an "other" option in this case.

> ``-w`` : BY default nextflow_ uses the current directory to store all the temporary files (called as ``work`` directory). You can change that using the ``-w`` flag

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``-w`` : By default nextflow_ will create a ``work`` directory in the current directory to store all temporary files and nextflow related files. You can change this work directory using the ``-w`` flag
```

> ``-p`` : You can specify the executor to use using ``-p`` flag. Rightnow the available profiles are cluster, HTCondor and startard (default).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``-profile`` : You can specify the profile to use using ``-profile`` flag. For details on profiles see :ref: Configuring Profiles section
```

>Right now the available profiles are cluster, HTCondor and startard (default).

This should link to section on user configuring their own profiles. These will not work out of the box the end user.

To see all of the command line options available you can refer to `nexflow CLI documentation <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/cli.html#command-line-interface-cli>`_

Resuming the workflow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> One of the most powerful features of nextflow_ is resuming the workflow from the last checkpoint. If your pipeline was interrupted for some reason you can resume it from the lat checkpoint using the resume flag (``-resume``). Eg, ``nextflow run KwanLab/Autometa -c parameters.config -resume``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the most powerful features of nextflow_ is resuming the workflow from the last completed process. If your pipeline was interrupted for some reason you can resume it from the last completed process using the resume flag (``-resume``). Eg, ``nextflow run KwanLab/Autometa -c parameters.config -resume``
```

Execution Report
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> After running nextflow you can see the execution statistics of your autometa run, including the time taken, CPUs used, RAM used, etc separately for each process. Nextflow would generate a summary report, a timeline report and a trace report automatically for you in the ``pipeline`` directory. You can read more about these execution reports `here <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html#execution-report>`_. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After running nextflow you can see the execution statistics of your autometa run, including the time taken, CPUs used, RAM used, etc separately for each process. Nextflow would generate a summary report, a timeline report and a trace report automatically for you in the ``pipeline_info`` directory. You can read more about these execution reports `here <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html#execution-report>`_. 
```

Workflow Visualized
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> You can also visualize the entire workflow ie. create the DAG from the written DOT file. Install `Graphviz <https://graphviz.org/>`_ and do ``dot -Tpng < pipeline_info/autometa-dot > autometa-dag.png`` to get the in the ``png`` format.

Reviewer: What is DAG? or DOT?

For nextflow_ to run the Autometa pipeline through a job scheduler you will need to update the respective 'profile' section in nextflow's config file. Each 'profile' may be configured with any available scheduler as noted in the `nextflow executors docs <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/executor.html>`_. By default nextflow_ will use your local computer as the 'executor'. The next section briefly walks through nextflow_ executor configuration to run with the slurm job scheduler.

We have prepared a template for ``nextflow.config`` which you can access from our GitHub repository using this `link <https://github.com/WiscEvan/Autometa/blob/4b4e3c60e076706e28deae4ae4d45f26b5df7dee/nextflow.config>`_. Go ahead and copy this file to your desired location and open it in your favorite text editor (eg. Vim, nano, VSCode, etc).

SLURM
^^^^^

This allows you to run the pipeline using the SLURM resource manager. To do this you'll first needed to identify the slurm partition to use. You can find the available slurm partitions by running ``sinfo``. Example: On running ``sinfo`` on our cluster we get the following:

.. image:: ../img/slurm_partitions.png

>     :alt: Slurm partitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :alt: Screen shot of ``sinfo`` output showing ``queue`` listed under partition  
```

The slurm partition available on our cluster is queue.  You'll need to update this in ``nextflow.config``. 

.. todo::
    Change the path to ``nextflow.config`` after the merge.

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: groovy
```

    // Find this section of code in nextflow.config
    }
    cluster {
    process.executor = "slurm"
    // queue is the slurm partition to use in our case
    // Set SLURM partition with queue directive.
    process.queue = "queue" // <<-- change this to whatever your partition is called
    // See https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/executor.html#slurm for more details.
    }

More parameters that are available for the slurm executor are listed in the nextflow `executor docs for slurm <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/executor.html#slurm>`_.

HTCondor
^^^^^^^^

This allows you to run the pipeline using the HTCondor resource manager. To do this you'll need to enable the HTCondor executor to condor value in the ``nextflow.config``.

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: groovy
```

    // Find this section of code in nextflow.config
    }
    chtc {
        process.executor = "condor"
        // See https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/executor.html#htcondor for more configuration options.
    }

> More parameters that are available for the slurm executor are listed in the nextflow executor `docs for HTCondor <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/executor.html#htcondor>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More parameters that are available for the htcondor executor are listed in the nextflow executor `docs for HTCondor <https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/executor.html#htcondor>`_.
```

#. Unclustered contigs leftover will be re-clustered until no more acceptable clusters are yielded

If you include a taxonomy table in the, Autometa will attempt to further partition the data based on ascending taxonomic specificity (i.e. in the order phylum, class, order, family, genus, species) when clustering unclustered contigs from a previous attempt. We found that this is mainly useful if you have a highly complex metagenome (lots of species), or you have several related species at similar coverage level.

Use the following command to run the binning:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Archaeal binning
    autometa-binning <path/to/kmers_norm.tsv> \
    <path/to/coverage_table.tsv> <path/to/archaea.markers.tsv> \
    <path/to/archaea_binning.tsv> --embedded-kmers <path/to/embedded_kmers.tsv> \
    --taxonomy <path/to/taxonomy.tsv> --clustering-method <dbscan or hdbscan> --domain archaea

    # Bacterial binning
    autometa-binning <path/to/kmers_norm.tsv> \
    <path/to/coverage_table.tsv> <path/to/bacterial.markers.tsv> \
    <path/to/bacteria_binning.tsv> --embedded-kmers <path/to/embedded_kmers.tsv> \

>     --taxonomy <path/to/taxonomy.tsv> --clustering-method <dbscan or hdbscan> --domain bacteria

Reviewer 2: I initially couldn't run this (see Issue #133)

Reviewer 2: Evan commented on Slack and thinks the command is wrong:

```
Looks like you’ve provided the kmers table where you should have provided the markers table. The sacc column is from the markers table

The kmer embedding is loaded already, so if you’ve copied and pasted from the docs, then the docs has the input paths wrong. Otherwise, this is not a bug, the kmers table is loaded in and then the markers table is trying to be loaded in but fails as the incorrect file was provided.
```

Reviewer 2: Apparently the positional arguments have to be after the optional ones.

7. Unclustered recruitment (Optional)
-------------------------------------

Supervised machine learning is used to classify the unclustered contigs to the bins that we have produced. This steop is optional and the results should be verified (see Note below) before going ahead with it.

.. note::
    The machine learning step has been seen to pick up contigs that not necessary belong to the genome. Careful inscpection of coverage and taxonomy should be done before you go ahead and use results from this step.

Use the following command to run the unclustered recruitment step:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Archaea
    autometa-unclustered-recruitment <path/to/kmers_norm.tsv> \
    <path/to/coverage_table.tsv> <path/to/archaea_binning.tsv> \
    <path/to/archaea.markers.tsv> <path/to/arachaea_unclustered_recruitment.tsv> \
    --taxonomy <path/to/taxonomy.tsv> --classifier decision_tree

    # Bacteria
    autometa-unclustered-recruitment <path/to/kmers_norm.tsv> \
    <path/to/coverage_table.tsv> <path/to/bacteria_binning.tsv> \
    <path/to/bacteria.markers.tsv> <path/to/bacteria_unclustered_recruitment.tsv> \

>     --taxonomy <path/to/taxonomy.tsv> --classifier decision_tree

Reviewer 2: I didn't even get to trying this - I just didn't have much hope after the last five or so commands failed.

*params.embedding_method* :  Choices are "sksne", "bhsne", "umap" (default is bhsne) See :ref:`advanced-usage-kmers` section for deails

*params.embedding_dimensions* : Final dimensions of the kmer frequencies matrix (default is 2). See :ref:`advanced-usage-kmers` section for deails

*params.kingdom* : Bin contigs belonging to this kingdom. Choices are "bacteria" and "archaea" (default is bacteria). 

*params.clustering_method* : Cluster contigs using which clustering method. Choices are "dbscan" and "hdbscan" (default is "dbscan"). See :ref:`advanced-usage-binning` section for deails

*params.binning_starting_rank* : Which taxonomic rank to start the binning from. Choices are "superkingdom", "phylum", "class", "order", "family", "genus", "species" (default is "superkingdom"). See :ref:`advanced-usage-binning` section for deails

*params.classification_method* : Which clustering method to use for unclustered recruitment step. Choices are "decision_tree" and "random_forest" (default is "decision_tree"). See :ref:`advanced-usage-unclustered-recruitment` section for deails

> *params.completeness* :  Minimum completeness needed to keep a cluster (default is atleast 20% complete). See :ref:`advanced-usage-binning` section for deails

Reviewer 3: "atleast"
"at least"

> *params.purity* : Minimum purity needed to keep a cluster (default is atleast 95% pure). See :ref:`advanced-usage-binning` section for deails

Reviewer 3: "atleast"
"at least"
